Add the Context notion. (#424)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/api-propagators.md

</details>

> Propagators leverage the underlying `Context` to inject and extract

Author: You mean, to have this text under such "Overview" section?

data for each cross-cutting concern, such as traces and metrics.

Propagators API consists of the following formats:

- `HTTPTextFormat` is used to inject and extract a value as text into carriers that travel
  in-band across process boundaries.

> Deserializing must set `IsRemote` to true on the returned `SpanContext`.

Reviewer: This should be moved to Extract section, out of place here.

Author: Oh, I see your point. I will do.

@Oberon00 I think this is because deserialization setting `IsRemote` is very, very specific to extraction.

Reviewer 2: @carlosalberto @yurishkuro You are completely right, it seems I misread the @yurishkuro's comment.

</details>

## Overview

Propagators leverage the `Context` to inject and extract

> data for each cross-cutting concern, such as traces and metrics.

Reviewer 3: nit: traces and correlation context?

</details>

## Overview

Propagators leverage the `Context` to inject and extract
data for each cross-cutting concern, such as traces and metrics.

The Propagators API consists of the following formats:

> - `HTTPTextFormat` is used to inject and extract a value as text into carriers that travel

Reviewer 2: Grammar nit: You write "inject and extract ... into" but it's "inject into" vs "extract from". I'm not a native speaker, so this might be fine.

Author: I'm going including this one, but I'd prefer to not touch **existing** mistakes/nits, and rather fix them in separate PRs. I.e. in `master` we have:

> is used to inject and extract a value as text into carriers that travel in-band across process boundaries.

context data to and from messages exchanged by the applications.
Each concern creates a set of `Propagator`s for every supported `Format`.

> Propagators leverage `Context` to inject and extract data for each

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Propagators leverage the `Context` to inject and extract data for each
```

Required arguments:

> - a `Context` containing the value to be injected, if any. The value can be `SpanContext` or

Author: This is because each Propagator in theory focuses on a specific, particular value (let it be `SpanContext` or `DistributedContext`). Will change the wording to make things clearer.

> `DistributedContext`. This can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.

Reviewer: I would add "the Propagator MUST retrieve the appropriate value from the context first, which can be SpanContext, DC, or another cross-cutting context".

Required arguments:

> - a `Context`. The Propagator MUST retrieve the appropiate value from the `Context` first, which can be `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. This argument can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `Context`. The Propagator MUST retrieve the appropiate value from the `Context` first, which can be `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. This argument can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.
```

I would start all the bullet points with upper case.

> - A `Context`. The Propagator MUST retrieve the appropiate value from the `Context` first, which can be `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. This argument can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.

Reviewer 5: It was my understanding that DistributedContext had been renamed to CorrelationContext?

Author: @dyladan It will, but such PR is not merged yet ;) Either this or that another PR will have to be updated, depending on which one gets merged first.

> - A `Context`. The Propagator MUST retrieve the appropiate value from the `Context` first, which can be `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. For languages supporting current `Context` state this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting to the current `Context` instance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A `Context`. The Propagator MUST retrieve the appropriate value from the `Context` first, which can be a`SpanContext`, a `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. For languages supporting current `Context` state, this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting to the current `Context` instance.
```

Author: 👍

- the carrier that holds propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or http request.

> - the `Setter` invoked for each propagation key to add or remove.

Reviewer: For HTTP, does Setter do `header.Set` or `header.Add`? The section below is not clear; since it describes another little interface it should be written in the similar format, methods & arguments.

The W3C `tracestate` header may be split into multiple entries (repeated headers). It's impossible to do if Setter only has Set method (but maybe it's ok, since not all transports where we might use HTTPPropagator actually allow repeated headers).

Author: Same situation as `Getter`, i.e. we might need to re-work it a little bit.

Author: Filled another issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/444 ;)

Required arguments:

> - A `Context`. The Propagator MUST retrieve the appropriate value from the `Context` first, which can be a `SpanContext`, a `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. For languages supporting current `Context` state, this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting to the current `Context` instance.

Reviewer 3: nit: s/DistributedContext/CorrelationContext (in preparation for the renaming).

### Extract

> Extracts the value from upstream. For example, as http headers. The extracted value

Author: Sounds clearer to what we had before. Including this.

> will be stored in the specified `Context`.

Author: I will go with MUST - extraction should override any previous value.

> If the value could not be parsed, the underlying implementation will decide to return an

Reviewer: s/will decide to return/MAY return/

Author: Yeah, this needs to use **set** - and as mentioned in other comments, it feels to me like it MUST set a value, to override any previous one (`SpanContext` or `DistributedContext`, etc).

I will reword things to make it cleaner and simple.

> object representing either a null value, an empty value, an invalid value, or a valid value.

Reviewer: What is an example of a valid value when cannot parse the payload?

Required arguments:

> - a `Context` used to store the extracted value. This can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.

Reviewer: Inaccurate; the context is used as parent for another context which stores the value

Author: Oh, I remember I had it originally as 'base' `Context` (similar to your "parent" usage). I removed because it seemed off, but I will put it back. 

@Oberon00 I'd leave out the `copy()` scenario, and just mention that a new `Context` is used, if that works for you.

- the carrier holds propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or http request.
- the instance of `Getter` invoked for each propagation key to get.

Returns a new `Context` created from the specified one, containing the extracted value, if any.

> The extracted value will not be present in the old `Context`.

Reviewer 2: I think what that wants to say is:

```suggestion
The `Context` passed as argument MUST NOT be modified.
```

Although maybe we want to give languages the leeway to make a `void extract(MutableContext context, ...)` API instead of the OTEP-like `Context extract(Context parent, ...)`.

Author: I'm not sure we can put a MUST here, as it heavily depends on the language's context implementation/API. A SHOULD should suffice IHMO.

### Extract

> Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, as http headers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, from the headers of an HTTP request.
```

> If the value could not be parsed, the underlying implementation MUST set a null value or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the value could not be parsed, the implementation MUST set a null value or
```

What's with that "underlying"?

Author: Ooops, I forgot to remove this one.

> an empty value, and MUST NOT throw any exception.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an empty value (i.e., it must not leave any previous non-empty value as-is), and MUST NOT throw any exception.
```

Author: I don't quite like the clarification, as the `MUST` already puts weight into this. So we either keep the Specification over explanatory or succinct ;)

Required arguments:

> - a `Context` used as parent of a new `Context` containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. This argument can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a `Context` to be used as parent of a new `Context` containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. This argument can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.
```

> - a `Context` used as parent of a new `Context` containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. This argument can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.

Reviewer 2: ", which can be a `SpanContext`, ..."
This clause seems misplaced here, it should be moved to the return value description below. The "which" seems to refer to the "extracted value" but this is the documentation of the "Context" argument, so I was initially confused because I thought it referred to the context.

> - a `Context` used as parent of a new `Context` containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`, `DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context. This argument can default to the current `Context` if such facility exists.

Reviewer 6: Saying that this argument can default to the something implies it is not a required argument. It should be clarified that it is required only if default facility does not exist.

Author: What about: "For languages supporting current `Context` state, this argument can become optional, defaulting to the current `Context` instance"?

Reviewer 6: I like the suggestion 😄. I would only change it to be more normative:

> For languages supporting current Context state this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting to the current Context instance.

Author: @MrAlias Sounds good to me, will update it this way.

- the carrier holds propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or http request.
- the instance of `Getter` invoked for each propagation key to get.

Returns a new `Context` containing the extracted value. The `Context` passed as argument

> SHOULD NOT be modified.

Author: Ok, let's go with `MUST` here - as long as we don't go with `SHOULD` in `context.md`, that is (which talks about implementations we don't fully control).

> `IsRemote` must be set to true if the extracted value is a `SpanContext`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the extracted value is a `SpanContext`, its `IsRemote` property MUST be set to true.
```

Clarify that this is not some global `IsRemote` but `SpanContext.IsRemote`.

### Extract

Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, from the headers of an HTTP request.

> If a cross-cutting concern value could not be parsed from the carrier,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a value can not be parsed from the carrier for a cross-cutting concern,
```

### Extract

Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, from the headers of an HTTP request.

> If the value could not be parsed, the implementation MUST set a null value or

Reviewer: - set or return?
- what does empty/null mean? Is it a specific language keyword/sentinel like null/nil, or are we saying that the return value is still a valid object reference and one needs to additionally introspect it to understand that it is "empty"?
- also consider the following case: in Jaeger one can send a jaeger-debug-id HTTP header that triggers a debug trace. The extractor does not have any additional API, so it returns an instance of SpanContext that is semi-empty, ie it has no trace IDs, but stores the value of that header. The user can't really tell that, but the tracer can recognize the special SpanContext when it is used as a parent for a new span.

Reviewer 6: With regard to the `s/set/return/` point, I think set would be correct. We might need to do a better job explaining that it is setting a cross-concern value of the `Context` to be null/empty (right?).

Author: Hey @yurishkuro thanks for the feedback.

I agree with @MrAlias regarding the set. Will update this part to make sure it's clear.

>  Is it a specific language keyword/sentinel like null/nil

Yes, that's the idea. I will be trying to expand on this, but the idea is that, upon an error, the propagator can:

1. Set a sentinel value (`null`) to signal there was an error.
2. Use a value such as an invalid `SpanContext` to signal that there was an error, just as 1) (I don't like this case so much, as you *need* to inspect the `SpanContext` to realize this is an invalid instance - but we already have this behavior defined in the Specification, so lets keep it).
3. Use a partial value, as the one you mentioned in your example.

As 3) is missing, I'm wondering if mentioning that a valid value can be set as well (and maybe mention the partial `SpanContext` case as an example) should be enough for you?

Reviewer: I think the point is that _if_ you require `null` value, then the Jaeger's example cannot be supported. Unless we start stretching the semantics of "value could not be parsed".

Author: So if I understand correctly, saying that "either null or an empty value upon error can be set" is not enough?

Just trying to understand it here. If this is the case, I will 'revert' it for now to *not* expect a null/nil value, as we used to do it before this PR.

Reviewer: I would prefer to lower expectation of what extract() must do. If there is a valid trace context in the request headers, it must extract a valid SpanContext - I think we agree on that. If there is no valid trace context in the request headers, do we need to demand any behavior? Whatever is extracted may be useable as a "parent" for the next span, or it may be null, or it maybe this debug object that's neither a parent nor a null. I think the only semantic restrictions we should impose are:
  * if there is valid context in the request, then return something that will be used as a parent
  * if there is no valid context, then the new span should be come a root span

Author: Fair enough, now we are not requiring any specific value, but simply that the implementation MUST set something (in order to prevent using previously set values by mistake).

As said, we can later revisit this part if we happen to need enforcing anything.

> If the value could not be parsed, the implementation MUST set a null value or

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If a cross-cutting concern value could not be parsed, the implementation MUST set a null value or
```

Author: Nice. Although it's longer, it's way clearer. Thanks.

it deems appropiate, and it MUST NOT throw any exception.

Required arguments:

- A `Context`. For languages supporting current `Context` state this argument is OPTIONAL, defaulting to the current `Context` instance.
- the carrier holds propagation fields. For example, an outgoing message or http request.

> - the instance of `Getter` invoked for each propagation key to get.

Reviewer: So-o-o, Jaeger context cannot be parsed using only the Getter! Here's an example of Jaeger context:
```
uber-trace-id: <some string, similar to W3C trace context>
uberctx-tenancy: test
uberctx-user: Yuri
```

The trace context has a fixed key name `uber-trace-id`, but baggage is encoded using variable header names.

In the OpenTracing we had an iterator over all headers, not just a Getter.

Author: Oh, interesting. I'd personally have no problem for changing this to an iterator (maybe have both?). I can open an issue so we discuss this specific detail at proper length. Would that work for you?

Reviewer: Also, the W3C `tracestate` header may be split into multiple entries (repeated headers). So Getter with API like `Get(String): String` won't work.

Author: Filled [an issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/443) ;)

> Returns a new `Context` as child of the `Context` passed as argument,

Reviewer: Do we have a formal definition of "Context is a child of another Context"? I would use "derived from" instead of "child of".

Reviewer: Is the returned context made current by the propagator or by the instrumentation?

Author: We dont - so lets go with "derived from" to avoid confusion.

Author: Btw, the `Context` is made current by the instrumentation. For making it current we need to use the global section, which is optional ;(

containing the extracted value, which can be a `SpanContext`,
`DistributedContext` or another cross-cutting concern context.

> The `Context` passed as argument MUST NOT be modified.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `Context` passed as an argument MUST NOT be modified.
```

> The `Context` passed as an argument MUST NOT be modified.

Reviewer: seems irrelevant since contexts are immutable.

Author: I will add a note on `Context` being immutable at the start of the document, and remove these comments. I remember there was fear that for some languages, a `Context` could be something that can be changed in-place, but until/unless we meet such case, we don't have to worry.

Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, from the headers of an HTTP request.

If a cross-cutting concern value could not be parsed, the implementation MUST set a value

> it deems appropiate, and it MUST NOT throw any exception.

Reviewer 5: "deems appropriate" sounds a little to vague for a spec to me. Should it be some sentinel null value, or an empty value? (for instance would tracestate parse to `null` or `[]`)

Author: We don 't want to force propagators to use/set specific values (that includes nil/sentinels). In the end, only the cross-cutting concern will have access to its data in `Context` (we won't expose keys), so we don't *really* need to enforce this (we only need to, upon error, overriding any previously set value).

If we are wrong, we can always re-visit this part in the future. Let me know what you think ;)

Reviewer 5: its fine, I just feel like the spec should be making SIGs behave as similarly as possible from language to language and saying "whatever you feel is best" is sort of the opposite of that. In this case I think it should be fairly benign though so its probably fine.

Author: I understand. However, there are specific cases, as the one mentioned by Yuri, where an implementation might decide to use a partial or debug `SpanContext`, for example (which are not quite sentinels IHMO). Probably we could mention only that "the implementation is free to use either a null value, an empty value or a valid value", which was the very original (although I also remember complains about that line being too vague, etc ;) )

Author: @yurishkuro Do you think this is good enough for you? I _think_ this is all that is needed before we merge this one ;)

Reviewer: Agree on "deems appropriate" being pretty funky. Perhaps rephrase like this:

If a cross-cutting concern's value could not be parsed from the carrier, the implementation MUST NOT throw an exception. It MAY store a value in the context that the implementation can recognize as a null or empty value.

Author: That works with me, only changing the MAY to MUST, as we need to override any previous value.

Author: @yurishkuro Done ;)

### Extract

Extracts the value from an incoming request. For example, from the headers of an HTTP request.

If a value can not be parsed from the carrier for a cross-cutting concern,

> the implementation MUST NOT throw an exception. It MUST store a value in `Context`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the implementation MUST NOT throw an exception. It MUST store a value in the `Context`
```
